Let's take a look at an example of blocking code.
Here we have two console logs separated by a long function call.
This probably will work the way that you would expect your JavaScript code to work.
When we run it, we get the first console log to show up immediately.
We have to wait for the long function call to complete,
before we get console log number two.
Let's take stock of what we've learned so far.
Threads can only do one thing at a time.
But if a process is non-blocking and goes idle waiting for an I/O response,
it allows the thread to continue on with the rest of the program.
We talked about API calls being non-blocking,
but we never really discussed why.
The truth is that,
whenever work moves off the thread,
we want it to be non-blocking.
But that still doesn't totally explain what's going on here.
The next thing we need to take into account is what kind of animal JavaScript is.
JavaScript is described as a single threaded programming language with asynchronous I/O.
Now that's a lot of words,
but we've actually covered everything we need to understand it.
JavaScript is single threaded,
no problem there, we knew that.
But the asynchronous I/O part,
let's take a closer look at that.
We know asynchronous is the same as non-blocking.
But what does I/O refer to?
I/O is short for input-output,
and refers to any communication between your program and the outside world, like an API.
It turns out, that built into the JavaScript language are a bunch of internal APIs.
Actions like operating on the DOM, setting timers,
and other tasks are actually requests to the JavaScript browser API.
You might have already guessed it,
but that means those tasks take place on another thread,
and that's the piece we needed.
Let's take a look at an asynchronous example.
Much like the synchronous example,
we have two console logs separated by a non-blocking function call.
Inside of that function,
we have another console log.
The question is, what order are these console logs going to show up in?
When we run the code,
you can see that one and three happened immediately.
It says, if the console log three skipped this non-blocking function call,
that wouldn't be possible with the JavaScript rules that we knew previously.
But as we just learned,
JavaScript uses asynchronous non-blocking I/O.
SetTimeout is part of the JavaScript browser API.
So when you call it,
it's actually operating on another thread.
On that thread, it will wait for three seconds,
before console log in two.
This happening on another thread part of the SetTimeout,
means that console log three will happen immediately after console log one.
This is a great example of asynchronous code in action.
Because our set-timeout is happening on another thread,
our function is non-blocking,
which means that we go straight from console.log One,
to invoking the non-blocking function,
and then console.log three immediately after.
You'll get the chance to try out exactly this pattern in the challenges.